Add metric descriptions (#121)
hazelcast/imdg-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/metrics.adoc

= Metrics
[[appendix]]

The table below lists the metrics with their explanations in alphabetical order.

[cols="2,1,4a"]
.Metrics
|===
| Metric Name
| Unit
| Description

|`cache.averageGetTime`
|µs
|the mean time to execute gets on the cache

|`cache.averagePutTime`
|µs
|the mean time to execute puts on the cache

|`cache.averageRemovalTime`
|µs
|the mean time to execute removes on the cache

|`cache.cacheEvictions`
|count
|the number of evictions on the cache

|`cache.cacheGets`
|count
|the number of gets on the cache

|`cache.cacheHits`
|count
|the number of hits (successful get operations) on the cache

|`cache.cacheHitPercentage`
|percent

> |the percentage of hits (successful get operations) on the cache

Author: yes, exactly

> |the percentage of hits (successful get operations) on the cache

Reviewer: Then let's mention it like that

= Metrics
[[appendix]]

The table below lists the metrics with their explanations in alphabetical order.

[cols="2,1,4a"]
.Metrics
|===
| Metric Name
| Unit
| Description

|`cache.averageGetTime`
|µs
|Mean time to execute gets on the cache

|`cache.averagePutTime`
|µs
|Mean time to execute puts on the cache

|`cache.averageRemovalTime`
|µs
|Mean time to execute removes on the cache

|`cache.cacheEvictions`
|count
|Number of evictions on the cache

|`cache.cacheGets`
|count
|Number of gets on the cache

|`cache.cacheHits`
|count
|Number of hits (successful get operations) on the cache

|`cache.cacheHitPercentage`
|percent

> |Percentage of hits (successful get operations) out of all get operations on the cache

Author: addressed in b0330f3

|`classloading.loadedClassesCount`
|count
|Number of classes that are currently loaded

|`classloading.totalLoadedClassesCount`
|count
|Total number of classes that have been loaded since the instance has started execution.

|`classloading.unloadedClassesCount`
|count
|Total number of unloaded classes.

|`client.endpoint.count`
|count
|Number of active client endpoints for this member

|`client.endpoint.totalRegistrations`
|count
|Total number of client endpoint registrations

|`cluster.clock.clusterStartTime`
|ms
|Start time of the cluster (when the first member in cluster becomes master, its localClockTime value is saved as clusterStartTime)

|`cluster.clock.clusterTime`
|ms
|Elapsed time since the cluster was created

|`cluster.clock.clusterTimeDiff`
|ms
|Difference between this member's local clock timestamp and the cluster clock timestamp sent by the master member

|`cluster.clock.clusterUpTime`
|ms
|Uptime of the cluster (current time - cluster start time)

|`cluster.clock.localClockTime`
|ms
|Member's local clock timestamp

|`cluster.clock.maxClusterTimeDiff`
|ms
|Maximum observed cluster time difference

|`cluster.connection.closedTime`
|count

> |Connection close time for this connection

Author: for some metrics, there are also a metric description tags that shows what this metric belongs to, for this case, these 4 tags are specified what this connection is:
- endpoint=[10.212.134.152]:5701
- client=bdae5ad8-4be6-4217-87e7-15dd04a237dd
- clientname=hz.client_1
- timestamp=1616759245227

but I did not document them in this first iteration

|`cluster.connection.connectionId`
|count
|the connection id for this client connection

|`cluster.connection.eventHandlerCount`
|count

> |the number of event handler for this client connection

Reviewer: Number of the event handlers ...

|`cluster.heartbeat.lastHeartbeat`
|ms
|Last timestamp of sending heartbeats to the other known cluster members

|`cluster.size`
|count

> |Size of the cluster

Author: Addressed in 5c51e3b

> |the last timestamp of sending heartbeats to the other known cluster members

Reviewer: Last timestamp of the heartbeats sent to the ...

|`cp.atomiclong.value`
|count

> |the value of this AtomicLong

Reviewer: Maybe making AtomicLong as monospaced as in the other primitives mentioned below, i.e., `IAtomicLong`

|`cp.countdownlatch.count`
|count

> |the initial count of the `ICountDownLatch`

Reviewer: ... count of `ICountDown...

|`cp.countdownlatch.remaining`
|count

> |the remaining number of expected count-downs

Reviewer: ... expected countdowns

|`cp.countdownlatch.round`
|count

> |the round number of the `ICountDownLatch`, each time `ICountDownLatch` is initialized with a new count after it downs to zero, a new round begins

Reviewer: Round number of `ICountDownLoatch`; each time ...

|`cp.lock.acquireLimit`
|count

> |the maximum number of reentrant acquires of this `FencedLock`

Reviewer: ... reentrant acquirements by this ...

|`cp.lock.lockCount`
|count

> |Number that shows how many times this `FencedLock` acquired

Author: Addressed in 5c51e3b

|`cp.lock.owner`
|count
|the address of the `FencedLock` owner

|`cp.lock.ownerSessionId`
|count
|the sessionId of the `FencedLock` owner

|`cp.semaphore.available`
|count
|the number of the remaining available permits

|`cp.semaphore.initialized`

> |count

Reviewer: boolean

Author: I updated its description

> |a boolean state, which shows whether semaphore is initialized with a value or not. In exposed metrics it will be 0 when semaphore is not initialized, a positive value otherwise

Reviewer: Specifies whether .... or not; in exposed metrics, it shows 0 when ...

|`cp.session.creationTime`
|ms

> |the creation time of this session

Reviewer: ... this CP session

|`cp.session.endpoint`
|

> |the address of the endpoint which session belongs to

Reviewer: ... which the CP session ...

|`cp.session.endpointType`
|
|the type of the endpoint; either SERVER or CLIENT

|`cp.session.expirationTime`
|ms

> |the expiration time of the session

Reviewer: ... of the CP session

|`cp.session.version`
|count

> |a boolean state, which shows whether semaphore is initialized with a value or not. In exposed metrics it will be 0 when semaphore is not initialized, a positive value otherwise

Reviewer: Version of the CP session (maybe a clear explanation of what "version" means here).

|`event.eventQueueSize`
|count
|the total number of events pending to be processed

|`event.eventsProcessed`
|count
|the total number of processed events

|`event.listenerCount`
|count
|the number of subscribed listeners for the specified service

|`event.publicationCount`
|count
|the number of published events for the specified service

|`event.queueCapacity`
|count

> |the queue capacity of the executor processing the events. This capacity is shared for all events

Reviewer: ... events (this capacity .....)

|`event.rejectedCount`
|count

> |the number of rejected events. If the event is not accepted to the executor in `hazelcast.event.queue.timeout.millis`(see xref:system-properties.adoc[]), it will be rejected and not processed

Reviewer: Number of the rejected events; if the event is not accepted by the executor in `hazelcast .....

(It'd be good to place an anchor on the related system property to forward the reader directly to the description of it in the System Properties appendix, I'll take care of it).

|`event.syncDeliveryFailureCount`
|count

> |the number of failures of sync event delivery 

Reviewer: I couldn't get this. The topic is like the delivery of synced events?

|`event.threadCount`
|count
|the number of threads for the event service executor (the event thread count)

|`event.totalFailureCount`
|count
|the number of events that fail to be published

|`executor.cancelled`
|count
|the number of cancelled operations on the executor service

|`executor.completed`
|count
|the number of completed operations on the executor service

|`executor.creationTime`
|ms
|the creation time of this executor on the member

|`executor.pending`
|count
|the number of pending operations on the executor service

|`executor.started`
|count
|the number of started operations on the executor service

|`executor.totalExecutionTime`
|ms

> |the total execution time of operations finished

Reviewer: ... time of the finished operations

|`executor.totalStartLatency`
|ms
|Total start latency of operations started

|`executor.internal.completedTasks`
|count
|Number of completed tasks by this executor

|`executor.internal.maximumPoolSize`
|count
|Maximum number of threads in the executor's thread pool

|`executor.internal.poolSize`
|count
|Number of threads in the executor's thread pool

|`executor.internal.queueSize`
|count

> |Number 

Author: added the description of it (number of pending task in this executor's task queue)

|`executor.internal.remainingQueueCapacity`
|count
|Remaining capacity on the executor's task queue

// TODO: Validate this file.partition metrics 
|`file.partition.freeSpace`
|bytes
|Amount of free space in the given directory, user.home

|`file.partition.totalSpace`
|bytes
|Amount of total space in the given directory, user.home

|`file.partition.usableSpace`
|bytes
|Amount of usable space in the given directory, user.home

|`flakeIdGenerator.batchCount`
|count
|Total number of times the Flake ID generator has been used to generate a new ID batch

|`flakeIdGenerator.creationTime`
|ms
|Creation time of this Flake ID Generator on the member

|`flakeIdGenerator.idCount`
|count
|Total number of IDs generated (the sum of IDs for all batches)

|`gc.majorCount`
|count
|Total number of major garbage collections (GCs) that have occurred

|`gc.majorTime`
|ms
|Accumulated elapsed time in major GCs

|`gc.minorCount`
|count
|Total number of minor GCs that have occurred

|`gc.minorTime`
|ms
|Accumulated elapsed time in minor GCs

|`gc.unknownCount`
|count

> |Number of unknown GCs that cannot be determined to be as a minor or major (this is usually due to the lack of support of the used garbage collector)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Number of unknown GCs that cannot be determined as minor or major (this is usually due to the lack of support of the used garbage collector)
```

|`map.totalMaxSetLatency`
|ms
|Maximum latency of local set operations on the map

|`map.totalPutLatency`
|ms
|Total latency of local put operations on the map

|`map.totalRemoveLatency`
|ms
|Total latency of local remove operations on the map

|`map.totalSetLatency`
|ms
|Total latency of local set operations on the map

|`map.index.averageHitLatency`
|ns
|Average hit latency for the index on this member

|`map.index.averageHitSelectivity`
|percent
|Average selectivity of the hits served by the index on this member (the returned value is in the range from 0.0 to 1.0 - values close to 1.0 indicate a high selectivity meaning the index is efficient; values close to 0.0 indicate a low selectivity meaning the index efficiency is approaching an efficiency of a simple full scan)

|`map.index.creationTime`
|ms
|Creation time of the index on this member

|`map.index.hitCount`
|count
|Total number of index hits (the value of this metric may be greater than the `map.index.queryCount` since a single query may hit the same index more than once)

|`map.index.insertCount`
|count
|Number of insert operations performed on the index

|`map.index.memoryCost`
|bytes

> |Local memory cost of the index (for on-heap indexes (OBJECT and BINARY storages), the returned value is just a best-effort approximation and doesn't indicate a precise on-heap memory usage of the index)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Local memory cost of the index (for on-heap indexes in OBJECT or BINARY formats, the returned value is just a best-effort approximation and doesn't indicate a precise on-heap memory usage of the index)
```

|count
|Number of `PartitionSpecificRunnable` tasks executed by this operation thread

|`operation.thread.completedRunnableCount`
|count
|Total number of runnables executed by this operation thread

|`operation.thread.completedTotalCount`
|count
|Total number of tasks (`Operation` + `PartitionSpecificRunnable` + `Runnable` + `TaskBatch`) completed on this operation thread 

|`operation.thread.errorCount`
|count
|Total number of failed tasks on this operation thread

|`operation.thread.normalPendingCount`
|count
|Number of normal pending operations (tasks)

|`operation.thread.priorityPendingCount`
|count
|Number of priority pending operations (tasks)

|`os.committedVirtualMemorySize`
|bytes
|Amount of committed virtual memory (that is, the amount of virtual memory guaranteed to be available to the running process)

|`os.freePhysicalMemorySize`
|bytes
|Amount of free physical memory

|`os.freeSwapSpaceSize`
|bytes
|Amount of free swap space size

|`os.maxFileDescriptorCount`
|count
|Maximum number of open file descriptors (only for UNIX platforms)

|`os.openFileDescriptorCount`
|count
|Number of open file descriptors (only for UNIX platforms)

|`os.processCpuLoad`
|percent

> |Recent cpu usage for the JVM process; a negative value if not available

Reviewer: Recent CPU ...

|`os.processCpuTime`
|ms
|CPU time used by the process on which the JVM is running

|`os.systemCpuLoad`
|percent

> |Recent cpu usage for the whole system; a negative value if not available

Reviewer: Recent CPU ...

|`reliableTopic.totalReceivedMessages`
|count
|Total number of received messages of this reliable topic on this member

|`queue.averageAge`
|ms
|Average age of the items in this member

|`queue.backupItemCount`
|count
|Number of backup items held by the member

|`queue.creationTime`
|ms
|Creation time of the topic on the member

|`queue.eventOperationCount`
|count
|Number of event operations

|`queue.maxAge`
|ms
|Maximum age of the items in this member

|`queue.minAge`
|ms
|Minimum age of the items in this member

|`queue.numberOfEmptyPolls`
|count
|Number of null returning poll operations

|`queue.numberOfEvents`
|count
|Number of event operations (duplicate of eventOperationCount)

|`queue.numberOfOffers`
|count
|Number of offer/put/add operations

|`queue.numberOfOtherOperations`
|count
|Number of other operations

|`queue.numberOfPolls`
|count
|Number of poll/take/remove operations.

|`queue.numberOfRejectedOffers`
|count
|Number of rejected offers

|`queue.ownedItemCount`
|count
|Number of owned items in this member

|`queue.total`
|count
|Total number of operations (numberOfOffers + numberOfPolls + numberOfOtherOperations)

|`raft.destroyedGroupIds`
|count

> |Destroyed raft node group ids

Reviewer: ... group IDs

|`raft.group.availableLogCapacity`
|count
|Available log capacity for this CP group

|`raft.group.commitIndex`
|count
|Commit index of this CP group

|`raft.group.lastApplied`
|count
|Last applied index of this CP group

|`raft.group.lastLogIndex`
|count
|Last log index of this CP group

|`raft.group.lastLogTerm`
|count
|Last log term of this CP group

|`raft.group.memberCount`
|count
|Number of members in this CP group

|`raft.group.snapshotIndex`
|count
|Raft snapshot index of this CP group

|`raft.group.term`
|count
|Raft term of this CP group

|`raft.metadata.activeMembersCommitIndex`
|count
|Commit index of the active CP members

|`raft.metadata.activeMembers`
|count
|Number of active CP members

|`raft.metadata.groups`
|count
|Number of destroyed CP groups

|`raft.missingMembers`
|count
|Number of missing CP members

|`raft.nodes`
|count
|Number of local Raft nodes

|`raft.terminatedRaftNodeGroupIds`
|count

> |terminated raft node group ids

Reviewer: Terminated ... group IDs

|`replicatedMap.creationTime`
|ms

> |Creation time of this replicated map on this member.

Reviewer: ... on this member

|`replicatedMap.totalGetLatencies`
|ms
|Total latency of get operations

|`replicatedMap.totalPutLatencies`
|ms
|Total latency of put operations

|`replicatedMap.totalRemoveLatencies`
|ms
|Total latency of remove operations

|`replicatedMap.total`
|count
|Total number of operations on this member

|`runtime.availableProcessors`
|count
|Number of processors available to the JVM

|`runtime.freeMemory`
|bytes
|Amount of free memory in the JVM

|`runtime.maxMemory`
|bytes
|Maximum amount of memory that the JVM will attempt to use

|`runtime.totalMemory`
|bytes
|Total amount of memory in the JVM, the value of this metric may vary over time, depending on the host environment

|`runtime.upTime`
|ms
|Uptime of the JVM

|`runtime.usedMemory`
|bytes
|Approximation to the total amount of memory currently used

|`set.creationTime`
|ms
|Creation time of the set on the member

|`set.lastAccessTime`
|ms
|Last access (read) time of the locally owned items

|`set.lastUpdateTime`
|ms
|Last update time of the locally owned items

|`tcp.acceptor.eventCount`
|count
|Total number of the connections accepted by TcpServerAcceptor

|`tcp.acceptor.exceptionCount`
|count

> |Number of thrown exception on this TcpServerAcceptor

Reviewer: ... thrown exceptions ...

|ms
|Idle time that measures how long this TcpServerAcceptor has not received any events

|`tcp.acceptor.selectorRecreateCount`
|count
|Number of times the selector was recreated

|`tcp.balancer.imbalanceDetectedCount`
|count
|Number of times the `IOBalancer` detects the imbalance of loads on `NioThread` s

|`tcp.balancer.migrationCompletedCount`
|count
|Number of completed NioPipeline migrations by the IOBalancer (these migrations are performed to fix the load imbalance problem on the NioThreads)

|`tcp.bytesReceived`
|bytes
|Number of bytes received over all connections (active and closed)

|`tcp.bytesSend`
|bytes
|Number of bytes sent over all connections (active and closed)

|`tcp.connection.acceptedSocketCount`
|count
|Number of accepted socket channels

|`tcp.connection.activeCount`
|count
|Number of active connections

|`tcp.connection.clientCount`
|count
|Number of the active client connections

|`tcp.connection.closedCount`
|count
|Number of closed connections

|`tcp.connection.connectionListenerCount`
|count
|Number of active connection listeners

|`tcp.connection.count`
|count
|Number of `TcpServerConnection`

|`tcp.connection.inProgressCount`
|count

> |Number of connections establishments in progress

Reviewer: ... connection establishments ...

|`tcp.connection.out.priorityFramesWritten`
|count
|Number of priority frames written into this nio pipeline

|`tcp.connection.out.priorityWriteQueuePendingBytes`
|bytes
|Total size of priority frames pending in the write queue

|`tcp.connection.out.priorityWriteQueueSize`
|count
|Number of priority frames pending in the write queue

|`tcp.connection.out.scheduled`
|count
|Ordinal of enum state of this outbound pipeline: 0 -> UNSCHEDULED, 1 -> SCHEDULED, 2 -> BLOCKED, 3 -> RESCHEDULE

|`tcp.connection.out.writeQueuePendingBytes`
|bytes
|Total size of normal frames pending in the write queue

|`tcp.connection.out.writeQueueSize`
|count
|Number of normal frames pending in the write queue

|`tcp.inputThread/outputThread.bytesTransceived`
|bytes
|Amount of transceived data on this NioThread

|`tcp.inputThread/outputThread.completedTaskCount`
|count
|Total number of completed tasks on this NioThread

|`tcp.inputThread/outputThread.eventCount`
|count
|Total number of the connections accepted by TcpServerAcceptor

|`tcp.inputThread/outputThread.framesTransceived`
|count
|Number of transceived frames on this NioThread

|`tcp.inputThread/outputThread.idleTimeMillis`
|ms

> |Idle time that indicates how long since the last read/write

Reviewer: ... indicates the duration since the last ...

|`tcp.inputThread/outputThread.ioThreadId`
|count
|Thread ID of this NioThread

|`tcp.inputThread/outputThread.priorityFramesTransceived`
|count
|Number of transceived priority frames

|`tcp.inputThread/outputThread.processCount`
|count
|Number of processed `NioPipeline`s on this NioThread

|`tcp.inputThread/outputThread.selectorIOExceptionCount`
|count

> |Number of times that io exceptions are thrown during selection

Reviewer: ... that I/O exceptions..

(just being consistent with the other I/O mentions in the documentation)

> = Metrics

Reviewer: Can we change the title to "List of Hazelcast Metrics"?

Author: Made the requested change

|`operation.invocations.invocationTimeoutMillis`
|ms
|timeout for operation invocations

|`operation.invocations.lastCallId`
|count
|the last issued invocation call ID

|`operation.invocations.normalTimeouts`
|count
|the number of times that the operation invocations timeout

|`operation.invocations.pending`
|count
|the number of pending invocations

|`operation.invocations.usedPercentage`
|percent
|the usage percentage of the operation invocation capacity that can concurrently occur (pending invocations/ max concurrent invocations)

|`operation.operationTimeoutCount`
|count
|possibly a leftover (never used)

|`operation.parker.parkQueueCount`
|count
|the number of separate WaitSet (set of operations waiting for some condition)

|`operation.parker.totalParkedOperationCount`
|count
|the total number of parked operations

|`operation.partitionThreadCount`
|count
|the number of partition operation handler threads for given member

|`operation.priorityQueueSize`
|count
|the number of priority operations pending (priority partition ops. + priority generic ops.)

|`operation.queueSize`
|count

> |

Author: Added them

|ns
|the total elapsed time of commit operations' executions to the destination endpoint since the beginning

|`partitions.totalElapsedMigrationOperationTime`
|ns
|the total elapsed time of migration & replication operations' executions from source to destination endpoints since the beginning

|`partitions.totalElapsedMigrationTime`
|ns
|the total elapsed time from start of migration tasks to their completion since the beginning

|`pnCounter.creationTime`
|ms
|the creation time of the PN counter on the member

|`pnCounter.totalDecrementOperationCount`
|count
|the number of subtract (including decrement) operations on this PN counter

|`pnCounter.totalIncrementOperationCount`
|count
|the number of add (including increment) operations on this PN counter

|`pnCounter.value`
|count
|the current value of the pn counter

|`proxy.createdCount`
|count
|the number of created proxies for a given service.

|`proxy.destroyedCount`
|count
|the number of destroyed proxies for a given service.

|`proxy.proxyCount`
|count
|the number of active proxies for a given service. e.g., the number of all proxies for the IMap.

|`raft.destroyedGroupIds`
|count

> |

Reviewer 3: Do you need help with these?

Author: I need help with them. I can only convert the metric name to the description but this won't be explanatory.

|`raft.metadata.activeMembers`
|count
|

|`raft.metadata.activeMembersCommitIndex`
|count
|

|`raft.metadata.groups`
|count
|

|`raft.missingMembers`
|count
|

|`raft.nodes`
|count
|

|`raft.terminatedRaftNodeGroupIds`
|count
|the terminated raft node group ids

|`runtime.availableProcessors`
|count
|the number of processors available to the JVM

|`runtime.freeMemory`
|bytes
|the amount of free memory in the JVM.

|`runtime.maxMemory`
|bytes
|the maximum amount of memory that the JVM will attempt to use.

|`runtime.totalMemory`
|bytes
|the total amount of memory in the JVM. The value returned by this method may vary over time, depending on the host environment.

|`runtime.upTime`
|ms
|the uptime of the JVM

|`runtime.usedMemory`
|bytes
|an approximation to the total amount of memory currently used

|`tcp.acceptor.eventCount`
|count

> |

Reviewer 3: the total number of the connections accepted by TcpServerAcceptor

|`tcp.acceptor.exceptionCount`
|count
|the number of thrown exception on this TcpServerAcceptor

|`tcp.acceptor.idleTimeMillis`
|ms
|the idle time that measures how long this TcpServerAcceptor has not received any events

|`tcp.acceptor.selectorRecreateCount`
|count
|the number of times the selector was recreated

|`tcp.balancer.imbalanceDetectedCount`
|count
|the number of times the `IOBalancer` detects the imbalance of loads on `NioThread`s

|`tcp.balancer.migrationCompletedCount`
|count
|the number of completed NioPipeline migrations by the IOBalancer (these migrations are performed to fix the load imbalance problem on the NioThreads) 

|`tcp.bytesReceived`
|bytes
|the number of bytes received over all connections (active and closed)

|`tcp.bytesSend`
|bytes
|the number of bytes sent over all connections (active and closed)

|`tcp.connection.acceptedSocketCount`
|count
|the number of accepted socket channels

|`tcp.connection.activeCount`
|count
|the number of active connections

|`tcp.connection.clientCount`
|count

> |

Reviewer 3: the number of the active client connections

|`tcp.connection.closedCount`
|count
|the number of closed connections 

|`tcp.connection.connectionListenerCount`
|count
|the number of active connection listeners

|`tcp.connection.count`
|count
|the number of `TcpServerConnection`

|`tcp.connection.inProgressCount`
|count

> |

Reviewer 3: The number of connections establishments in progress.

|tcp.connection.openedCount
|count
|the number of opened connections

|tcp.connection.textCount
|count

> |

Reviewer 3: The number of connections used by text-based protocols (REST, Memcache).
